JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
growing GOP defections.
We sit down with Senator Susan
Collins, the
latest in a group of Republican
leaders refusing
to support a Donald Trump
presidency.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: Turkish
President Erdogan and Russian
President Putin
work to mend ties -- what
renewed relations
could mean for the two countries
and the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, what
happens when children
with autism reach adulthood?
In the first of our two-part
series, we look
at a pilot program for a group
that's often
ignored.
BONNIE KLUGER, Mother of Josh
Kluger: There
are so many ways that he has
changed and grown,
that he's going to school, he's
learning classes.
He's taking responsibilities for
his homework.
He's taking responsibility for
his budgeting.
GWEN IFILL: And spending a day
on the other
side of the classroom -- what a
high school
assistant principal learned
after shadowing
one of her students.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For Donald Trump,
more discord
in his own ranks, as he tries to
make up ground
in the presidential race.
His economic speech of Monday
was swept from
the headlines by a high-profile
rejection
today.
The Republican nominee faced new
defections
just a day after trying to reset
his campaign.
Republican Senator Susan Collins
of Maine
wrote in The Washington Post
that she will
not vote for Trump, explaining
she's been
-- quote -- "increasingly
dismayed by his
constant stream of cruel
comments.
And she added, "Treating others
with respect
is an idea that should transcend
politics."
Trump said nothing about Collins
this afternoon
in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Instead, he went after Democrat
Hillary Clinton
over gun rights.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Hillary wants to abolish --
essentially abolish
the Second Amendment.
(BOOING)
DONALD TRUMP: By the way, and if
she gets
to pick -- if she gets to pick
her judges,
nothing you can do, folks,
although the Second
Amendment people, maybe there
is.
I don't know.
But I will tell you what.
That will be a horrible day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton has said
she doesn't
favor abolishing the Second
Amendment.
Criticism of Trump came from 50
Republican
national security officials as
well.
In a letter yesterday, they
wrote: "We are
convinced that he would be a
dangerous president
and would put at risk our
country's national
security and well-being."
Trump dismissed their opposition
this morning
in an interview with FOX
Business, claiming
they would have loved to have
been part of
his campaign.
DONALD TRUMP: These were the
people that have
been there a long time,
Washington establishment
people that have been there a
long time.
Look at the terrible job they
have done.
I hadn't planned on using any of
these people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The candidate
also leveled
another harsh new charge at
Clinton in a tweet
about Iran's execution of a
nuclear scientist.
It said -- quote -- "Many people
are saying
that the Iranians killed the
scientist who
helped the U.S. because of
Hillary Clinton's
hacked e-mails."
Trump cited no evidence for the
claim, and
a Clinton campaign spokesman
tweeted back:
"Many people are saying equals I
made this
up."
Meanwhile, Clinton was hunting
for votes in
Florida, with a stop in Miami.
The Democratic nominee took on
Congress, too,
demanding that lawmakers return
to Washington
immediately to vote funding for
fighting the
Zika virus.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I am very disappointed that the
Congress went
on recess before actually
agreeing on what
they would do to put the
resources into this
fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton has now
formally agreed
to participate in the three
scheduled presidential
debates.
Trump has said he will too, but
may want to
renegotiate the terms.
All this comes as more new polls
show Clinton
surging ahead, and opening up
big leads with
white college-educated women, a
demographic
that Republican Mitt Romney won
in 2012.
Later, critics accused Trump of
suggesting
that gun owners resort to
violence.
The Trump campaign said he was
actually referring
to political power, urging them
to vote in
record numbers.
We will hear directly from
Senator Susan Collins
about why she's rejected the
Trump candidacy
right after the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: A major
wildfire surged through
California's San Bernardino
Mountains, threatening up to
5,000 homes;
900 firefighters are now
battling the blaze
that sparked to life on Sunday.
So far, it's only 6 percent
contained, and
officials have shut down area
schools.
Another California fire, north
of Big Sur,
has engulfed more than 100
square miles.
It's about 50 percent contained,
but still
growing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Delta Air Lines
faced more
turmoil today, as it struggled
to recover
from Monday's computer system
outage.
More than 500 flights were
canceled today,
on top of 1,000 yesterday.
Hundreds more were delayed.
As passengers waited in airports
around the
world, Delta offered refunds and
$200 in travel
vouchers.
It's also waiving fees for
people switching
flights.
GWEN IFILL: The United Nations
appealed today
to all sides in Syria for a
humanitarian cease-fire
in Aleppo.
The country's largest city has
seen heavy
fighting, with rebels breaking
through a government
siege over the weekend.
In Geneva today, U.N. officials
argued, warned
there's a grave risk of disease,
unless Aleppo's
public utilities can be
repaired.
MAN: Attacks on civilian
infrastructure this
week have severely damaged the
city's electric
and water infrastructure,
leaving over two
million residents of Aleppo
without electricity
or access to the public water
network.
Water available through wells
and tanks is
not nearly enough to sustain the
needs of
the population.
GWEN IFILL: The U.N. says that,
at a minimum,
it needs weekly pauses in the
fighting to
allow food and medicine to get
in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Yemen, a
coalition led by
Saudi Arabia resumed airstrikes
on the capital
for the first time since April.
One strike hit a food factory in
Sanaa, killing
14 workers on the overnight
shift.
It came after U.N. peace talks
collapsed over
the weekend.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, search crews
have recovered the black box
recorder from
a freighter that sank during a
hurricane last
October.
The El Faro went down off the
Bahamas, en
route to Jacksonville -- from
Jacksonville
to Puerto Rico.
All 33 crew members died.
The recorder is being brought
back to Virginia
Beach, Virginia, for
examination.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
three points
to close at 18533.
The Nasdaq rose 12 points, and
the S&P 500
added a fraction.
GWEN IFILL: And a late result
from the Summer
Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.
The U.S. women won the gold
medal this evening
in team gymnastics, for the
second Olympics
in a row.
Led by powerhouse Simone Biles,
the Americans
posted top scores in all four
events.
Competition in individual events
comes later
this week.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a Republican
senator explains why she won't
vote for Donald
Trump; Turkey and Russia meet
amid strained
relations with the U.S.;
learning to live
as an adult with autism; and
much more.
Now, for more on the Republican
defections
and discontent surrounding the
Trump candidacy,
we turn to Maine Senator Susan
Collins, who,
as we noted earlier, announced
today she will
not vote for Donald Trump, her
party's nominee.
She spoke with me earlier today
from Bangor,
Maine.
Senator Collins, welcome.
You have declared Donald Trump
today in your
op-ed as unworthy to be your
party's nominee
for president.
Why didn't you make that
conclusion sooner?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine: I kept
hoping that
Donald Trump, once he won the
primary, would
change.
I hoped that he would see a new
Donald Trump,
one who put forth thoughtful
policy positions,
stopped denigrating people, and
had a more
positive vision for America.
Regrettably, I have concluded
that there is
not going to be a new Donald
Trump, that he's
incapable of saying he's sorry,
of changing,
of learning, of growing.
And it was that conclusion that
has led me
to believe that he lacks the
temperament,
the judgment, the knowledge, and
the self-restraint
to be our next president.
GWEN IFILL: The questions about
his temperament
were raised again today when he
spoke in North
Carolina and said that the only
way -- he
suggested that the only way to
stop Hillary
Clinton from appointing judges
that they disagreed
with is that maybe the Second
Amendment folks
could handle it.
Does that suggest to you that he
was -- maybe
you didn't hear it because I
know you have
been traveling today, but does
that kind of
comment suggest to you a comment
on his temperament
or that he was joking or
suggesting violence
against his rival?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: I certainly don't
think he's
suggesting violence in any way.
But, again, it's a very poor
choice of words.
And I think this speaks to a
broader issue.
And that is the politicization
of the judicial
nomination process, which both
parties have
been guilty of.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Collins,
what does Donald
Trump's nomination as the
standard-bearer
for your party tell you about
your party?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: I don't think
that Donald Trump
represents the traditional
Republican values
and heritage of my party.
That's one reason that I don't
support him.
The Republican Party has always
revered the
individual.
We led the way in abolishing
slavery, for
example, and we recognize the
dignity and
worth of every human being.
And it is clear that Donald
Trump, by his
derogatory comments, by his
mocking of the
most vulnerable people in our
society, by
his marginalization of ethnic
and religious
minorities, doesn't reflect the
traditional
Republican values.
I want to see a Republican Party
that is a
big tent, inclusive party that
welcomes all
people to be Republicans and to
contribute
their ideas and support our
position of providing
opportunity to the American
people.
And I believe he goes in the
opposite direction
and deepens the divisions that
are so pervasive
in our society today.
GWEN IFILL: And you acknowledged
in your piece
today that ran in The Washington
Post that
he is connecting with some
discontent in our
country and perhaps that Bernie
Sanders was
as well, you wrote.
So,
what is that?
And who can speak to that in
this election
year?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: I see that
disconnect very
clearly in my own state of
Maine, where there
are people who have been
affected by mill
closures, some of which have
been brought
about by poorly negotiated trade
agreements,
and they do feel marginalized
and left behind.
They have not been able to find
new work,
despite the fact that they did
nothing wrong
that caused them to lose their
jobs.
Both parties need to do a better
job of reaching
out to those individuals, to
those hardworking
families, and providing job
training, matching
people and giving them new
skills for new
jobs.
That is the one area where I
think Donald
Trump is striking a chord that
really resonates
and should resonate.
Both parties need to do a better
job of rejecting
poorly negotiated trade
agreements.
And I would put the president's
TPP, the Trans-Pacific
Partnership agreement, in that
category.
We have lost thousands of
manufacturing jobs
just in the state of Maine
alone, and that
resonates with people, and
understandably
so.
GWEN IFILL: Would you support
Hillary Clinton?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: I would not.
I did work well with Hillary
when she was
my colleague in the Senate, and
I certainly
don't bear her any ill will.
But when I listened carefully to
her commencement
speech, what I heard was a
laundry list of
very expensive new programs that
our country
simply cannot afford, and that
would add to
our already overwhelming $17
trillion debt.
I'm also disturbed by the
mismatch in her
answers to the questions about
her e-mail
server and what the FBI Director
Comey says
that the FBI's investigation
found.
GWEN IFILL: You said
commencement speech,
but I'm pretty sure you meant
convention speech.
I think that's right.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: I'm sorry.
GWEN IFILL: Can I -- have you
ever met Donald
Trump?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: I have only met
him once.
It was when he spoke to the
Republican Caucus.
At that time, I suggested that
he present
a more positive agenda to the
American people.
And I used the example of
supporting more
funding for biomedical research,
which has
been a real priority among
Republicans in
both the House and the Senate.
GWEN IFILL: And would you
suggest to any of
you colleagues that they join
you and oppose
him, those who have endorsed him
already especially?
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: Each of my
colleagues has to
make his or her own decision.
I wouldn't presume to tell them
what decision
they should make.
I have been heartened by the
number of e-mails
that I have received and text
messages from
colleagues in the Senate on both
sides of
the aisle applauding my op-ed
and supporting
what I have done.
Now, to be sure, there are those
who disagree
with me as well.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Senator Susan Collins,
Republican of Maine,
thank you very much for your
time.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we begin
an occasional
series about people living with
autism and
other spectrum disorders, A
Place in the World.
While reporting the history of
autism for
their book, "In a Different Key:
The Story
of Autism," co-authors John
Donvan and Caren
Zucker found a program in
Phoenix, Arizona,
that expands options for people
living with
autism.
This is the first of two
reports.
JOHN DONVAN, Co-Author, "In a
Different Key:
The Story of Autism": Why is it
a big deal
that Josh Kluger gets up every
morning and
makes his own breakfast and
straightens up
the place a little, and then
remembers, belatedly
to go back and grab his lunch
before he heads
off to work, which takes a
quarter-mile hike,
texting all the way, before he
reaches the
bus stop, and then a 45-minute
trip with one
transfer along the way?
And when I comes on board and
Josh shows me
how to swipe my ticket, why is
that a big
deal?
Because, until last year, Josh
had experienced
none of this.
No apartment.
No paying job.
No bus pass even.
Actually, he'd never ridden a
bus on his own
before last year.
How old are you now?
JOSH KLUGER, Program
Participant: I'm 36.
JOHN DONVAN: You only really
began being able
to ride the bus when you were
already over
30?
JOSH KLUGER: I think so, yes.
JOHN DONVAN: What did you have
to learn?
JOSH KLUGER: I know learned how
-- streets.
JOHN DONVAN: And though Josh is
not the chattiest
person around, except perhaps
when he's texting,
you can tell from his stride and
from his
air of confidence about where
he's heading
that Josh really likes the life
he has right
now.
Is this ours?
JOSH KLUGER: Yes.
JOHN DONVAN: OK.
JOHN DONVAN: And that he's going
to keep going
with it, autism or not.
JOHN DONVAN: With autism, it's
usually been
the kids whose faces we see when
the topic
is discussed, children like
these.
We root for their success in
school and on
the playground, and we have come
to recognize
that even a little boy like this
one, who
may look disconnected, and whose
autism keeps
him from speaking many words,
nevertheless
can sing and therefore also has
something
to say.
BOY (singing): Never give up on
wishes.
JOHN DONVAN: But the kids grow
up inevitably,
so that the boys whose photo you
just saw,
they have become these men.
We gathered them together to
make a point.
This one is now 19-year-old
Dylan.
And this little boy called
Stuart, he is now
22.
Josh, you have met.
He is 36.
This kid, he is 21 now and named
Ian.
Craig, he's a 26-year-old now.
And Jake, he grew into a man
also.
He's 22.
And the point is, adults don't
get nearly
the attention and support the
kids do, maybe
because they're not as cute or
because people
forget that autism is lifelong.
But it is.
And that fact is the driving
idea behind a
new pilot program called First
Place Transition
Academy, located in Phoenix,
Arizona, in which
these same young men are today
the pioneers.
WOMAN: Are you going to mix it?
Where would you find that?
MAN: In the store.
WOMAN: In the store?
JOHN DONVAN: There are nine of
them in all,
paired off together in a cluster
of apartments
in a complex where their
neighbors are mostly
retirees who have no autism
connection.
They eat together and learn
together, two
years of specialized training
designed to
improve their odds of having,
let's call it,
a successful adulthood, which
means what?
IAN MCCOY, Student: What
doughnuts would you
like for that one?
JOHN DONVAN: Well, take Ian, who
is now holding
down a paying job arranged for
by the program,
showing that he can be good at
customer service.
IAN MCCOY: I got the lemonade
and morning
buzz.
JOHN DONVAN: Social interactions
can be enormously
challenging for people on the
spectrum.
That's part of the reason that
unemployment
among autistic adults hovers
near 80 percent.
IAN MCCOY: Hello.
How's it going?
MAN: Pretty good, I guess.
JOHN DONVAN: Not long ago, that
included Ian,
who is an unfailing optimist.
Before you came here, where were
you?
Were you in high school?
IAN MCCOY: I was in my parents'
house for
at least two years.
I enrolled.
Here I am now a year later.
I am satisfied with my future.
JOHN DONVAN: What is your
future?
Do you know?
IAN MCCOY: It's hard to predict
right now.
JOHN DONVAN: Sure.
Sure.
IAN MCCOY: It's a brief idea.
I would like to live in an
apartment, pay
my own rent, have my own car and
have a career,
in other words, because I'm --
the part-time
job is kind of tedious, but it's
my main focus
for now.
JOHN DONVAN: Well, that's all
about learning
how to do jobs, right?
IAN MCCOY: Absolutely, yes.
JOHN DONVAN: The other men go to
other workplaces,
a garden that raises produce for
sales to
restaurants.
MAN: Awesome.
IAN MCCOY: An animal shelter
which happens
to be a volunteer job, but that
doesn't matter.
Knowing how to be professionally
responsible
and productive does, like being
on time for
work, dressing correctly for the
situation,
completing tasks assigned
reliably.
These are learned skills that do
not necessarily
come easily to all members of
the group because
of their autism.
BRAD HERRON-VALENZUELA, Gateway
Community
College: So, on the worksheet,
guys, you are
putting a check mark for the
items that you're
going to need to purchase in
your first apartment.
JOHN DONVAN: And support staff
literally imparts
lessons on the logistics of
adult life, like
this session held in a lecture
hall made available
by Gateway Community College.
It's a class on how to navigate
the options
available in public transport,
how to get
from here to there, with
quizzes.
MAN: Exact fare required.
JOHN DONVAN: When it comes to
successful adulthood,
it's this sort of
mundane-seeming know-how
that can in fact be crucial.
How important is that to their
success in
this program?
BRAD HERRON-VALENZUELA: Yes,
it's critical.
And it's one of the skills that
we target
really early on.
I mean, again, this is the thing
that's going
to allow them to access
employment.
It's going to allow them to
access different
social activities, different
quality of life
things.
JOHN DONVAN: So getting around
is key to independence?
BRAD HERRON-VALENZUELA:
Absolutely.
It's critical.
JOHN DONVAN: Which brings us
back to Josh.
That 45-minute commute of his
landed us here.
So this is your place of work,
huh?
JOSH KLUGER: Yes.
JOHN DONVAN: Wow.
Josh works for the Arizona
Diamondbacks baseball
team.
He and another member of the
group named Jake,
they have been cycling through a
variety of
jobs here, some in the office
upstairs, and
now they're getting their hands
dirty with
grounds maintenance.
Josh, you're not a big baseball
fan.
JOSH KLUGER: I'm not.
JOHN DONVAN: But you're a work
fan.
It sounds like you really love
this job.
JOSH KLUGER: In a way.
JOHN DONVAN: In a way.
Oh.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN DONVAN: OK.
But he loves being a working
man, even though
his boss here, Marian Rhodes,
says it has
not always been smooth.
MARIAN RHODES, Executive,
Arizona Diamondbacks:
He had a thing with his badge,
that he was
losing his badge constantly.
I said, where's your badge?
And he's like, I left it here,
whatever.
And I said -- I had to explain
to him, your
badge is like the key to your
home.
That's the key to our ballpark.
So, if you lose it, someone has
the key to
access our building at any time.
And I said, so what's the answer
here?
We now have him drop the badge
off in the
morning and pick the badge up.
And so he hasn't -- now he is
always clocked
in and clocked out.
JOHN DONVAN: But that's what
learning is about.
Are you willing to let these
guys make mistakes
more than you would other
people?
MARIAN RHODES: Definitely.
JOHN DONVAN: Yes?
JOHN DONVAN: Why is that
important?
MARIAN RHODES: Because you have
to meet them
where they are.
JOHN DONVAN: Josh's mom has been
astounded
by the change she's seen in the
past 12 months.
BONNIE KLUGER, Mother of Josh
Kluger: There
are so many ways that he has
changed and grown,
that he's going to school, he's
learning classes.
He's taking responsibilities for
his homework.
He's taking responsibility for
his budgeting.
JOHN DONVAN: This is all new?
BONNIE KLUGER: This is all new.
JOHN DONVAN: This is something
he learned
as a middle-aged man?
BONNIE KLUGER: As a middle-aged
man.
JOHN DONVAN: Wow.
BONNIE KLUGER: The growth has
been amazing.
It's really been amazing.
JOHN DONVAN: If Josh were not
here, where
would he be in life?
BONNIE KLUGER: At our house,
doing probably
the same thing, and not being
very happy.
And I don't know what his future
would have
been.
JOHN DONVAN: And back at the
apartment complex,
you can see how these guys, some
of whom had
no friends to speak of before in
their lives,
are learning to help each other
out.
They are, in short, a community.
And while this pilot project has
enrolled
only men, who today make up
roughly 80 percent
of people recognized as
autistic, the full
program will grow to include
women as well.
But now something needs to be
said as that
group shot we started with, and
in particular
about the man on the lower
right.
He was once that singing boy,
and, in fact,
he doesn't live with the other
men.
He can't, because his autism
affects him differently
from the others.
But there is a place being built
in Phoenix
that will also have room for
him.
That story in part two tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what an assistant
principal learned from spending
the day with
a student; the man with amnesia
who taught
us about memory; and creating
art with a lawn
mower.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first: It's
been three
weeks since a failed coup
attempt rocked the
nation of Turkey.
Since then, thousands have been
arrested in
a crackdown on suspected
plotters, including
military officers, educators and
journalists.
Today, there was no mistaking
the message
from Turkey's leader has
changed, by his choice
of where to travel.
A telling moment in St.
Petersburg: Russia's
President Vladimir Putin
welcomed Turkey's
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan,
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): The relations
between Russia
and Turkey entered into a really
positive
stage.
I am sure that steps we both
take will widen
our cooperation.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): Your visit today
means that we
all want at renewal of our
dialogue and restoration
of our relations in the
interests of Russian
and Turkish peoples.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's their first
meeting since
those relations were sent into a
tailspin
last November, when Turkey shot
down a Russian
warplane near the Syrian border.
Erdogan has since apologized,
and, today,
the two pledged to restart
commercial deals.
They will also discuss their
differences over
Syria.
Erdogan wants President Bashar
al-Assad ousted,
but Russian airpower has helped
keep him in
place.
The visit also comes as the July
coup attempt
has triggered tensions between
Turkey and
the West.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (through
translator):
Does the West support terrorism
or not?
Does the West side with
democracy or the coup
or terrorism?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Erdogan accuses a
former ally,
cleric Fethullah Gulen, of
fomenting the coup.
He lives in Pennsylvania, and
Turkey wants
the U.S. to extradite him
immediately.
Today, the Turkish justice
minister said the
U.S. is risking relations with a
NATO ally
by not handing Gulen over.
The Obama administration says
the normal extradition
process must play out.
ELIZABETH TRUDEAU, State
Department Spokesperson:
We expect all parties, media,
civil society,
the Turkish government, to be
responsible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
millions turned
out in Istanbul on Sunday in a
mass show of
support for Erdogan.
All the while, purges continue
throughout
the Turkish military and public
sector.
To date, more than 16,000 people
have been
arrested over the coup attempt.
Thousands more, including judges
and educators,
have been sacked.
Journalists have been detained
and scores
of news organizations shut down.
Joining me now for more on this,
Kemal Kirisci,
a senior fellow at the Brookings
Institution.
And Henri Barkey, he's director
of the Middle
East program at the Woodrow
Wilson International
Center for Scholars.
And welcome to both of you.
Henri Barkey, to you first.
You were in Turkey for a
conference the weekend
the coup took place.
You have been accused by the
Turkish media
of having played a role in
fomenting the coup.
Is there any truth to that?
HENRI BARKEY, Woodrow Wilson
International
Center for Scholars: Of course
not.
I mean, it's complete, complete
imagination.
They just want to accuse
America, and they're
using us as a scapegoat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so they just
made it up?
HENRI BARKEY: Oh, they made up
-- the stories
that they made up are so
incredible, that
they're not worth repeating on
the air, but
they involve fanciful American
criminals who
came from California to help us
do things,
to -- complete, complete
fiction.
We were on an island 45 minutes
away from
all the events and doing our
job, which was
at a conference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kemal Kirisci,
who do you believe
was behind the coup?
KEMAL KIRISCI, Brookings
Institution: I very
much empathize and agree with my
colleague
Henri Barkey, but I think one
also has to
understand that this nation is
going through
a major shock, a major trauma.
There was a coup attempt.
It was a bloody coup attempt.
Turkey has had previous
experiences with coups.
But none of them have been
directed towards
the public in the manner in
which this has
taken place.
None of the previous coups
attacked actually
the Turkish Parliament.
And the people on their own
steam at first,
and then galvanized the
president of Turkey,
stood up against this coup, and
feel that
they have succeeded in
protecting their democracy,
as much as this democracy may
have its problems.
But the country is also -- has a
longstanding
tradition of, unfortunately,
anti-Americanism,
anti-Westernism and skepticism
towards the
West.
And a number of issues have
aligned one after
the other that is fueling this
perspective
on the West.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
stop you
there, because I want to get to
this point
that Turkish government has --
they have repeatedly
said and suggested that the
United States
was behind the coup.
Henri Barkey, is there any
evidence that ties
the United States to what
happened?
HENRI BARKEY: Look, there is
absolutely no
evidence.
There is no reason for the
United States to
execute a coup.
It's not in the interests the
United States.
Turkey and the United States
have been working.
Although they have
disagreements, they were
working very closely on Syria
with the two
countries.
There was an agreement between
President Obama
and President Erdogan as to what
to do in
Syria.
The days of coups over.
No administration in the United
States in
the 21st century is going the
sanction a coup
in Turkey.
But this fallacy in Turkey that
everything
is done by the United States,
it's an easy
way of blaming others for
domestic issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kemal Kirisci,
how do you explain
this?
I mean, the Turkish government
has said the
U.S. is involved.
What do you believe about that?
KEMAL KIRISCI: You know, there's
very many
conflicting views that are
coming out.
On the one hand, there is what
you have just
said, what Henri has said.
But then the spokesman of the
president, Ibrahim
Kalin, keeps saying that that's
not the position
of the Turkish government and
presidency.
Yet, on the other hand, I have
watched hours
and hours of TV debate, and, in
those debates,
unfortunately, people of high
military ranks,
including a former chief of
staff, is convinced
that there is an American finger
somewhere
along the way, directly or
indirectly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Henri Barkey,
what are the
consequences of that if this
continues in
Turkey?
HENRI BARKEY: Well, the
consequences are serious.
At the moment, the American
government is
trying to keep low and not to
make too much
of a fuss.
But, unfortunately, the longer
this lasts,
the more the Turkish officials
directly or
indirectly attack the United
States, the more
the American -- Turkish public
is going to
become more anti-American.
And we have already seen the
consequences.
Fulbright has canceled now for
next year its
-- its...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Scholar exchange.
HENRI BARKEY: ... scholars going
forward,
because people are afraid that
the Americans
will be at risk.
And, therefore, it's more than
just Americans
being at risk.
It's the fact that it would be
very difficult
for Turkish officials and
American officials,
especially at the military
level, to work
together in a harmonious way as
they did before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Kemal
Kirisci, we're
hearing that officials in the
Erdogan government
are saying this.
What about President Erdogan
himself?
Do you think he believes that
the U.S. was
involved?
KEMAL KIRISCI: If you listen to
his rhetoric,
I think you would say yes.
However, it's very difficult to
go into his
mind.
He can also be very pragmatic
when he chooses
to be.
I think the point here is that
there was a
coup attempt and there are
allegations, for
some, quite convincing
allegations, that individuals
belonging to the Gulenist
movement were involved
in it.
As a consequence, an ally of the
United States,
a member of NATO's military is
in a mess.
The country is in a state of
turmoil.
And from my perspective, I think
these allegations
need to be taken seriously, and
maybe some
cooperation put into place to
investigate
whether they are true or not,
independently
of the extradition issue that
was made reference
to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean --
you're talking
about extraditing the cleric,
the Turkish
cleric who is in Pennsylvania.
KEMAL KIRISCI: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. has said
they don't
have the evidence to proceed
with an extradition.
But just to be clear, what are
you saying
by an investigation?
What are you saying needs to be
done here?
KEMAL KIRISCI: For the average
Turkish mind,
it's very difficult not -- not
to think that
the United States wouldn't have
some access
to intelligence information,
when, for example,,
the commander of the Incirlik
base group,
with whom the United States
shares the base,
was amongst the instigators of
the coup and
even attempted to seek asylum
with U.S. military
authorities there.
So, put yourself in the shoes of
an average
Turkish person, and maybe
officials as well,
and look at the United States,
look at its
resources, look at its
intelligence networks.
It becomes very difficult to
convince them
that somehow the United States
was oblivious
to what was coming up there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me...
(CROSSTALK)
KEMAL KIRISCI: ... prepared
personally to
go along with it, but that's the
state of
mind.
And I'm suggesting that the
United States
has a stake, the government has
a stake to
cooperate with their counterpart
and look
into whatever intelligence and
information
may be available through the
networks that
the U.S. has access.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Henri Barkey, is
there a way
to do that?
Where do you see this going?
HENRI BARKEY: I actually think
the only way
this is going to end is if
there's a very
forceful response from the
United States that
asks President Erdogan needs to
squash these
stories.
The only person in Turkey who
can squash these
stories is Mr. Erdogan.
If he gets up and says, "I don't
believe the
United States was involved, we
have no evidence
to that effect," that will put
most of the
rumors aside.
But, for that, I think President
Obama has
to get involved.
It's not going to happen because
some State
Department spokesperson said...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, President
Obama has said
this absolutely, unequivocally
didn't happen,
that there was no U.S.
involvement.
So, what more are you saying
President Obama...
HENRI BARKEY: He said this in a
press interview
with President Nieto of Mexico.
He needs to address directly the
Turkish press,
maybe invite the Turkish press
to the White
House, and challenge also
President Erdogan.
He can't let this go on like
this.
There won't be an investigation.
There cannot be an
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying the
administration
hasn't taken it seriously
enough?
HENRI BARKEY: Right.
Right.
So, they have taken it
seriously, but they're
choosing to keep quiet.
And that keeps the rumors going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Henri Barkey,
Kemal Kirisci,
thanks to both of you.
KEMAL KIRISCI: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: High school students
and parents
sometimes say principals and
teachers don't
quite understand what it's like
to be a student
these days.
It turns out there's an effort
to change that.
Some 1,300 principals recently
took a day
off from their usual role and
instead followed
one of their students for a day.
The approach came from two
groups outside
the traditional field of public
education,
the Design School at Stanford
University,
and IDEO, a design company based
in Palo Alto,
California.
Special correspondent John
Tulenko of Education
Week followed one principal
through the first
ever national Shadow a Student
Day Challenge.
It's part of our weekly
education series on
Making the Grade.
KAREN RITTER, Assistant
Principal, East Leyden
High School: My name is Karen
Ritter.
I'm an assistant principal at
East Leyden
High School, which is just
outside of Chicago.
And, today, I will be shadowing
a student.
JOHN TULENKO: Why are you doing
this?
KAREN RITTER: Just to get a
sense of what
students go through during the
day.
I don't really get to spend a
lot of time
with students.
Usually, I'm in charge of things
that the
teachers are involved in.
So, this includes teacher
evaluations, teacher
attendance, professional
development.
I would say 50 percent is in
meetings.
JOHN TULENKO: Do you feel like
you know what
goes on here?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
growing GOP defections. We sit
down with Senator
Susan Collins, the latest in a
group of Republican
leaders refusing to support a
Donald Trump
presidency.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: Turkish
President Erdogan and Russian
President Putin
work to mend ties -- what
renewed relations
could mean for the two countries
and the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, what
happens when children
with autism reach adulthood? In
the first
of our two-part series, we look
at a pilot
program for a group that's often
ignored.
BONNIE KLUGER, Mother of Josh
Kluger: There
are so many ways that he has
changed and grown,
that he's going to school, he's
learning classes.
He's taking responsibilities for
his homework.
He's taking responsibility for
his budgeting.
GWEN IFILL: And spending a day
on the other
side of the classroom -- what a
high school
assistant principal learned
after shadowing
one of her students.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For Donald Trump,
more discord
in his own ranks, as he tries to
make up ground
in the presidential race. His
economic speech
of Monday was swept from the
headlines by
a high-profile rejection today.
The Republican nominee faced new
defections
just a day after trying to reset
his campaign.
Republican Senator Susan Collins
of Maine
wrote in The Washington Post
that she will
not vote for Trump, explaining
she's been
-- quote -- "increasingly
dismayed by his
constant stream of cruel
comments.
And she added, "Treating others
with respect
is an idea that should transcend
politics."
Trump said nothing about Collins
this afternoon
in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Instead, he
went after Democrat Hillary
Clinton over gun
rights.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Hillary wants to abolish --
essentially abolish
the Second Amendment.
(BOOING)
DONALD TRUMP: By the way, and if
she gets
to pick -- if she gets to pick
her judges,
nothing you can do, folks,
although the Second
Amendment people, maybe there
is. I don't
know.
But I will tell you what. That
will be a horrible
day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton has said
she doesn't
favor abolishing the Second
Amendment.
Criticism of Trump came from 50
Republican
national security officials as
well. In a
letter yesterday, they wrote:
"We are convinced
that he would be a dangerous
president and
would put at risk our country's
national security
and well-being."
Trump dismissed their opposition
this morning
in an interview with FOX
Business, claiming
they would have loved to have
been part of
his campaign.
DONALD TRUMP: These were the
people that have
been there a long time,
Washington establishment
people that have been there a
long time. Look
at the terrible job they have
done. I hadn't
planned on using any of these
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The candidate
also leveled
another harsh new charge at
Clinton in a tweet
about Iran's execution of a
nuclear scientist.
It said -- quote -- "Many people
are saying
that the Iranians killed the
scientist who
helped the U.S. because of
Hillary Clinton's
hacked e-mails."
Trump cited no evidence for the
claim, and
a Clinton campaign spokesman
tweeted back:
"Many people are saying equals I
made this
up."
Meanwhile, Clinton was hunting
for votes in
Florida, with a stop in Miami.
The Democratic
nominee took on Congress, too,
demanding that
lawmakers return to Washington
immediately
to vote funding for fighting the
Zika virus.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I am very disappointed that the
Congress went
on recess before actually
agreeing on what
they would do to put the
resources into this
fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton has now
formally agreed
to participate in the three
scheduled presidential
debates. Trump has said he will
too, but may
want to renegotiate the terms.
All this comes as more new polls
show Clinton
surging ahead, and opening up
big leads with
white college-educated women, a
demographic
that Republican Mitt Romney won
in 2012.
Later, critics accused Trump of
suggesting
that gun owners resort to
violence. The Trump
campaign said he was actually
referring to
political power, urging them to
vote in record
numbers.
We will hear directly from
Senator Susan Collins
about why she's rejected the
Trump candidacy
right after the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: A major
wildfire surged through
California's San Bernardino
Mountains, threatening up to
5,000 homes;
900 firefighters are now
battling the blaze
that sparked to life on Sunday.
So far, it's
only 6 percent contained, and
officials have
shut down area schools.
Another California fire, north
of Big Sur,
has engulfed more than 100
square miles. It's
about 50 percent contained, but
still growing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Delta Air Lines
faced more
turmoil today, as it struggled
to recover
from Monday's computer system
outage. More
than 500 flights were canceled
today, on top
of 1,000 yesterday. Hundreds
more were delayed.
As passengers waited in airports
around the
world, Delta offered refunds and
$200 in travel
vouchers. It's also waiving fees
for people
switching flights.
GWEN IFILL: The United Nations
appealed today
to all sides in Syria for a
humanitarian cease-fire
in Aleppo. The country's largest
city has
seen heavy fighting, with rebels
breaking
through a government siege over
the weekend.
In Geneva today, U.N. officials
argued, warned
there's a grave risk of disease,
unless Aleppo's
public utilities can be
repaired.
MAN: Attacks on civilian
infrastructure this
week have severely damaged the
city's electric
and water infrastructure,
leaving over two
million residents of Aleppo
without electricity
or access to the public water
network. Water
available through wells and
tanks is not nearly
enough to sustain the needs of
the population.
GWEN IFILL: The U.N. says that,
at a minimum,
it needs weekly pauses in the
fighting to
allow food and medicine to get
in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Yemen, a
coalition led by
Saudi Arabia resumed airstrikes
on the capital
for the first time since April.
One strike
hit a food factory in Sanaa,
killing 14 workers
on the overnight shift. It came
after U.N.
peace talks collapsed over the
weekend.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, search crews
have recovered the black box
recorder from
a freighter that sank during a
hurricane last
October. The El Faro went down
off the Bahamas,
en route to Jacksonville -- from
Jacksonville
to Puerto Rico. All 33 crew
members died.
The recorder is being brought
back to Virginia
Beach, Virginia, for
examination.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
three points
to close at 18533. The Nasdaq
rose 12 points,
and the S&P 500 added a
fraction.
GWEN IFILL: And a late result
from the Summer
Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. The
U.S. women
won the gold medal this evening
in team gymnastics,
for the second Olympics in a
row. Led by powerhouse
Simone Biles, the Americans
posted top scores
in all four events. Competition
in individual
events comes later this week.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a Republican
senator explains why she won't
vote for Donald
Trump; Turkey and Russia meet
amid strained
relations with the U.S.;
learning to live
as an adult with autism; and
much more.
Now, for more on the Republican
defections
and discontent surrounding the
Trump candidacy,
we turn to Maine Senator Susan
Collins, who,
as we noted earlier, announced
today she will
not vote for Donald Trump, her
party's nominee.
She spoke with me earlier today
from Bangor,
Maine.
Senator Collins, welcome.
You have declared Donald Trump
today in your
op-ed as unworthy to be your
party's nominee
for president. Why didn't you
make that conclusion
sooner?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine: I
kept hoping
that Donald Trump, once he won
the primary,
would change. I hoped that he
would see a
new Donald Trump, one who put
forth thoughtful
policy positions, stopped
denigrating people,
and had a more positive vision
for America.
Regrettably, I have concluded
that there is
not going to be a new Donald
Trump, that he's
incapable of saying he's sorry,
of changing,
of learning, of growing.
And it was that conclusion that
has led me
to believe that he lacks the
temperament,
the judgment, the knowledge, and
the self-restraint
to be our next president.
GWEN IFILL: The questions about
his temperament
were raised again today when he
spoke in North
Carolina and said that the only
way -- he
suggested that the only way to
stop Hillary
Clinton from appointing judges
that they disagreed
with is that maybe the Second
Amendment folks
could handle it.
Does that suggest to you that he
was -- maybe
you didn't hear it because I
know you have
been traveling today, but does
that kind of
comment suggest to you a comment
on his temperament
or that he was joking or
suggesting violence
against his rival?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I certainly
don't think
he's suggesting violence in any
way.
But, again, it's a very poor
choice of words.
And I think this speaks to a
broader issue.
And that is the politicization
of the judicial
nomination process, which both
parties have
been guilty of.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Collins,
what does Donald
Trump's nomination as the
standard-bearer
for your party tell you about
your party?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I don't
think that Donald
Trump represents the traditional
Republican
values and heritage of my party.
That's one reason that I don't
support him.
The Republican Party has always
revered the
individual. We led the way in
abolishing slavery,
for example, and we recognize
the dignity
and worth of every human being.
And it is clear that Donald
Trump, by his
derogatory comments, by his
mocking of the
most vulnerable people in our
society, by
his marginalization of ethnic
and religious
minorities, doesn't reflect the
traditional
Republican values.
I want to see a Republican Party
that is a
big tent, inclusive party that
welcomes all
people to be Republicans and to
contribute
their ideas and support our
position of providing
opportunity to the American
people. And I
believe he goes in the opposite
direction
and deepens the divisions that
are so pervasive
in our society today.
GWEN IFILL: And you acknowledged
in your piece
today that ran in The Washington
Post that
he is connecting with some
discontent in our
country and perhaps that Bernie
Sanders was
as well, you wrote. So,
what is that? And who can speak
to that in
this election year?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I see that
disconnect
very clearly in my own state of
Maine, where
there are people who have been
affected by
mill closures, some of which
have been brought
about by poorly negotiated trade
agreements,
and they do feel marginalized
and left behind.
They have not been able to find
new work,
despite the fact that they did
nothing wrong
that caused them to lose their
jobs. Both
parties need to do a better job
of reaching
out to those individuals, to
those hardworking
families, and providing job
training, matching
people and giving them new
skills for new
jobs.
That is the one area where I
think Donald
Trump is striking a chord that
really resonates
and should resonate. Both
parties need to
do a better job of rejecting
poorly negotiated
trade agreements. And I would
put the president's
TPP, the Trans-Pacific
Partnership agreement,
in that category.
We have lost thousands of
manufacturing jobs
just in the state of Maine
alone, and that
resonates with people, and
understandably
so.
GWEN IFILL: Would you support
Hillary Clinton?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I would not.
I did work well with Hillary
when she was
my colleague in the Senate, and
I certainly
don't bear her any ill will. But
when I listened
carefully to her commencement
speech, what
I heard was a laundry list of
very expensive
new programs that our country
simply cannot
afford, and that would add to
our already
overwhelming $17 trillion debt.
I'm also disturbed by the
mismatch in her
answers to the questions about
her e-mail
server and what the FBI Director
Comey says
that the FBI's investigation
found.
GWEN IFILL: You said
commencement speech,
but I'm pretty sure you meant
convention speech.
I think that's right.
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I'm sorry.
GWEN IFILL: Can I -- have you
ever met Donald
Trump?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I have only
met him once.
It was when he spoke to the
Republican Caucus.
At that time, I suggested that
he present
a more positive agenda to the
American people.
And I used the example of
supporting more
funding for biomedical research,
which has
been a real priority among
Republicans in
both the House and the Senate.
GWEN IFILL: And would you
suggest to any of
you colleagues that they join
you and oppose
him, those who have endorsed him
already especially?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: Each of my
colleagues
has to make his or her own
decision. I wouldn't
presume to tell them what
decision they should
make.
I have been heartened by the
number of e-mails
that I have received and text
messages from
colleagues in the Senate on both
sides of
the aisle applauding my op-ed
and supporting
what I have done. Now, to be
sure, there are
those who disagree with me as
well.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Senator Susan Collins,
Republican of Maine,
thank you very much for your
time.
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we begin
an occasional
series about people living with
autism and
other spectrum disorders, A
Place in the World.
While reporting the history of
autism for
their book, "In a Different Key:
The Story
of Autism," co-authors John
Donvan and Caren
Zucker found a program in
Phoenix, Arizona,
that expands options for people
living with
autism.
This is the first of two
reports.
JOHN DONVAN, Co-Author, "In a
Different Key:
The Story of Autism": Why is it
a big deal
that Josh Kluger gets up every
morning and
makes his own breakfast and
straightens up
the place a little, and then
remembers, belatedly
to go back and grab his lunch
before he heads
off to work, which takes a
quarter-mile hike,
texting all the way, before he
reaches the
bus stop, and then a 45-minute
trip with one
transfer along the way?
And when I comes on board and
Josh shows me
how to swipe my ticket, why is
that a big
deal? Because, until last year,
Josh had experienced
none of this. No apartment. No
paying job.
No bus pass even. Actually, he'd
never ridden
a bus on his own before last
year.
How old are you now?
JOSH KLUGER, Program
Participant: I'm 36.
JOHN DONVAN: You only really
began being able
to ride the bus when you were
already over
30?
JOSH KLUGER: I think so, yes.
JOHN DONVAN: What did you have
to learn?
JOSH KLUGER: I know learned how
-- streets.
JOHN DONVAN: And though Josh is
not the chattiest
person around, except perhaps
when he's texting,
you can tell from his stride and
from his
air of confidence about where
he's heading
that Josh really likes the life
he has right
now.
Is this ours?
JOSH KLUGER: Yes.
JOHN DONVAN: OK.
JOHN DONVAN: And that he's going
to keep going
with it, autism or not.
JOHN DONVAN: With autism, it's
usually been
the kids whose faces we see when
the topic
is discussed, children like
these. We root
for their success in school and
on the playground,
and we have come to recognize
that even a
little boy like this one, who
may look disconnected,
and whose autism keeps him from
speaking many
words, nevertheless can sing and
therefore
also has something to say.
BOY (singing): Never give up on
wishes.
JOHN DONVAN: But the kids grow
up inevitably,
so that the boys whose photo you
just saw,
they have become these men.
We gathered them together to
make a point.
This one is now 19-year-old
Dylan. And this
little boy called Stuart, he is
now 22.
Josh, you have met. He is 36.
This kid, he
is 21 now and named Ian. Craig,
he's a 26-year-old
now. And Jake, he grew into a
man also. He's
22.
And the point is, adults don't
get nearly
the attention and support the
kids do, maybe
because they're not as cute or
because people
forget that autism is lifelong.
But it is.
And that fact is the driving
idea behind a
new pilot program called First
Place Transition
Academy, located in Phoenix,
Arizona, in which
these same young men are today
the pioneers.
WOMAN: Are you going to mix it?
Where would
you find that?
MAN: In the store.
WOMAN: In the store?
JOHN DONVAN: There are nine of
them in all,
paired off together in a cluster
of apartments
in a complex where their
neighbors are mostly
retirees who have no autism
connection.
They eat together and learn
together, two
years of specialized training
designed to
improve their odds of having,
let's call it,
a successful adulthood, which
means what?
IAN MCCOY, Student: What
doughnuts would you
like for that one?
JOHN DONVAN: Well, take Ian, who
is now holding
down a paying job arranged for
by the program,
showing that he can be good at
customer service.
IAN MCCOY: I got the lemonade
and morning
buzz.
JOHN DONVAN: Social interactions
can be enormously
challenging for people on the
spectrum. That's
part of the reason that
unemployment among
autistic adults hovers near 80
percent.
IAN MCCOY: Hello. How's it
going?
MAN: Pretty good, I guess.
JOHN DONVAN: Not long ago, that
included Ian,
who is an unfailing optimist.
Before you came here, where were
you? Were
you in high school?
IAN MCCOY: I was in my parents'
house for
at least two years. I enrolled.
Here I am
now a year later. I am satisfied
with my future.
JOHN DONVAN: What is your
future? Do you know?
IAN MCCOY: It's hard to predict
right now.
JOHN DONVAN: Sure. Sure.
IAN MCCOY: It's a brief idea. I
would like
to live in an apartment, pay my
own rent,
have my own car and have a
career, in other
words, because I'm -- the
part-time job is
kind of tedious, but it's my
main focus for
now.
JOHN DONVAN: Well, that's all
about learning
how to do jobs, right?
IAN MCCOY: Absolutely, yes.
JOHN DONVAN: The other men go to
other workplaces,
a garden that raises produce for
sales to
restaurants.
MAN: Awesome.
IAN MCCOY: An animal shelter
which happens
to be a volunteer job, but that
doesn't matter.
Knowing how to be professionally
responsible
and productive does, like being
on time for
work, dressing correctly for the
situation,
completing tasks assigned
reliably.
These are learned skills that do
not necessarily
come easily to all members of
the group because
of their autism.
BRAD HERRON-VALENZUELA, Gateway
Community
College: So, on the worksheet,
guys, you are
putting a check mark for the
items that you're
going to need to purchase in
your first apartment.
JOHN DONVAN: And support staff
literally imparts
lessons on the logistics of
adult life, like
this session held in a lecture
hall made available
by Gateway Community College.
It's a class
on how to navigate the options
available in
public transport, how to get
from here to
there, with quizzes.
MAN: Exact fare required.
JOHN DONVAN: When it comes to
successful adulthood,
it's this sort of
mundane-seeming know-how
that can in fact be crucial.
How important is that to their
success in
this program?
BRAD HERRON-VALENZUELA: Yes,
it's critical.
And it's one of the skills that
we target
really early on. I mean, again,
this is the
thing that's going to allow them
to access
employment. It's going to allow
them to access
different social activities,
different quality
of life things.
JOHN DONVAN: So getting around
is key to independence?
BRAD HERRON-VALENZUELA:
Absolutely. It's critical.
JOHN DONVAN: Which brings us
back to Josh.
That 45-minute commute of his
landed us here.
So this is your place of work,
huh?
JOSH KLUGER: Yes.
JOHN DONVAN: Wow.
Josh works for the Arizona
Diamondbacks baseball
team. He and another member of
the group named
Jake, they have been cycling
through a variety
of jobs here, some in the office
upstairs,
and now they're getting their
hands dirty
with grounds maintenance.
Josh, you're not a big baseball
fan.
JOSH KLUGER: I'm not.
JOHN DONVAN: But you're a work
fan. It sounds
like you really love this job.
JOSH KLUGER: In a way.
JOHN DONVAN: In a way. Oh.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN DONVAN: OK. But he loves
being a working
man, even though his boss here,
Marian Rhodes,
says it has not always been
smooth.
MARIAN RHODES, Executive,
Arizona Diamondbacks:
He had a thing with his badge,
that he was
losing his badge constantly. I
said, where's
your badge? And he's like, I
left it here,
whatever.
And I said -- I had to explain
to him, your
badge is like the key to your
home. That's
the key to our ballpark. So, if
you lose it,
someone has the key to access
our building
at any time. And I said, so
what's the answer
here? We now have him drop the
badge off in
the morning and pick the badge
up. And so
he hasn't -- now he is always
clocked in and
clocked out.
JOHN DONVAN: But that's what
learning is about.
Are you willing to let these
guys make mistakes
more than you would other
people?
MARIAN RHODES: Definitely.
JOHN DONVAN: Yes?
JOHN DONVAN: Why is that
important?
MARIAN RHODES: Because you have
to meet them
where they are.
JOHN DONVAN: Josh's mom has been
astounded
by the change she's seen in the
past 12 months.
BONNIE KLUGER, Mother of Josh
Kluger: There
are so many ways that he has
changed and grown,
that he's going to school, he's
learning classes.
He's taking responsibilities for
his homework.
He's taking responsibility for
his budgeting.
JOHN DONVAN: This is all new?
BONNIE KLUGER: This is all new.
JOHN DONVAN: This is something
he learned
as a middle-aged man?
BONNIE KLUGER: As a middle-aged
man.
JOHN DONVAN: Wow.
BONNIE KLUGER: The growth has
been amazing.
It's really been amazing.
JOHN DONVAN: If Josh were not
here, where
would he be in life?
BONNIE KLUGER: At our house,
doing probably
the same thing, and not being
very happy.
And I don't know what his future
would have
been.
JOHN DONVAN: And back at the
apartment complex,
you can see how these guys, some
of whom had
no friends to speak of before in
their lives,
are learning to help each other
out.
They are, in short, a community.
And while
this pilot project has enrolled
only men,
who today make up roughly 80
percent of people
recognized as autistic, the full
program will
grow to include women as well.
But now something needs to be
said as that
group shot we started with, and
in particular
about the man on the lower
right. He was once
that singing boy, and, in fact,
he doesn't
live with the other men. He
can't, because
his autism affects him
differently from the
others. But there is a place
being built in
Phoenix that will also have room
for him.
That story in part two tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what an assistant
principal learned from spending
the day with
a student; the man with amnesia
who taught
us about memory; and creating
art with a lawn
mower.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first: It's
been three
weeks since a failed coup
attempt rocked the
nation of Turkey.
Since then, thousands have been
arrested in
a crackdown on suspected
plotters, including
military officers, educators and
journalists.
Today, there was no mistaking
the message
from Turkey's leader has
changed, by his choice
of where to travel.
A telling moment in St.
Petersburg: Russia's
President Vladimir Putin
welcomed Turkey's
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan,
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): The relations
between Russia
and Turkey entered into a really
positive
stage. I am sure that steps we
both take will
widen our cooperation.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): Your visit today
means that we
all want at renewal of our
dialogue and restoration
of our relations in the
interests of Russian
and Turkish peoples.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's their first
meeting since
those relations were sent into a
tailspin
last November, when Turkey shot
down a Russian
warplane near the Syrian border.
Erdogan has
since apologized, and, today,
the two pledged
to restart commercial deals.
They will also discuss their
differences over
Syria. Erdogan wants President
Bashar al-Assad
ousted, but Russian airpower has
helped keep
him in place. The visit also
comes as the
July coup attempt has triggered
tensions between
Turkey and the West.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (through
translator):
Does the West support terrorism
or not? Does
the West side with democracy or
the coup or
terrorism?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Erdogan accuses a
former ally,
cleric Fethullah Gulen, of
fomenting the coup.
He lives in Pennsylvania, and
Turkey wants
the U.S. to extradite him
immediately. Today,
the Turkish justice minister
said the U.S.
is risking relations with a NATO
ally by not
handing Gulen over.
The Obama administration says
the normal extradition
process must play out.
ELIZABETH TRUDEAU, State
Department Spokesperson:
We expect all parties, media,
civil society,
the Turkish government, to be
responsible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
millions turned
out in Istanbul on Sunday in a
mass show of
support for Erdogan. All the
while, purges
continue throughout the Turkish
military and
public sector. To date, more
than 16,000 people
have been arrested over the coup
attempt.
Thousands more, including judges
and educators,
have been sacked. Journalists
have been detained
and scores of news organizations
shut down.
Joining me now for more on this,
Kemal Kirisci,
a senior fellow at the Brookings
Institution.
And Henri Barkey, he's director
of the Middle
East program at the Woodrow
Wilson International
Center for Scholars.
And welcome to both of you.
Henri Barkey, to you first.
You were in Turkey for a
conference the weekend
the coup took place. You have
been accused
by the Turkish media of having
played a role
in fomenting the coup. Is there
any truth
to that?
HENRI BARKEY, Woodrow Wilson
International
Center for Scholars: Of course
not. I mean,
it's complete, complete
imagination. They
just want to accuse America, and
they're using
us as a scapegoat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so they just
made it up?
HENRI BARKEY: Oh, they made up
-- the stories
that they made up are so
incredible, that
they're not worth repeating on
the air, but
they involve fanciful American
criminals who
came from California to help us
do things,
to -- complete, complete
fiction.
We were on an island 45 minutes
away from
all the events and doing our
job, which was
at a conference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kemal Kirisci,
who do you believe
was behind the coup?
KEMAL KIRISCI, Brookings
Institution: I very
much empathize and agree with my
colleague
Henri Barkey, but I think one
also has to
understand that this nation is
going through
a major shock, a major trauma.
There was a coup attempt. It was
a bloody
coup attempt. Turkey has had
previous experiences
with coups. But none of them
have been directed
towards the public in the manner
in which
this has taken place. None of
the previous
coups attacked actually the
Turkish Parliament.
And the people on their own
steam at first,
and then galvanized the
president of Turkey,
stood up against this coup, and
feel that
they have succeeded in
protecting their democracy,
as much as this democracy may
have its problems.
But the country is also -- has a
longstanding
tradition of, unfortunately,
anti-Americanism,
anti-Westernism and skepticism
towards the
West. And a number of issues
have aligned
one after the other that is
fueling this perspective
on the West.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
stop you
there, because I want to get to
this point
that Turkish government has --
they have repeatedly
said and suggested that the
United States
was behind the coup.
Henri Barkey, is there any
evidence that ties
the United States to what
happened?
HENRI BARKEY: Look, there is
absolutely no
evidence. There is no reason for
the United
States to execute a coup. It's
not in the
interests the United States.
Turkey and the United States
have been working.
Although they have
disagreements, they were
working very closely on Syria
with the two
countries. There was an
agreement between
President Obama and President
Erdogan as to
what to do in Syria.
The days of coups over. No
administration
in the United States in the 21st
century is
going the sanction a coup in
Turkey. But this
fallacy in Turkey that
everything is done
by the United States, it's an
easy way of
blaming others for domestic
issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kemal Kirisci,
how do you explain
this? I mean, the Turkish
government has said
the U.S. is involved. What do
you believe
about that?
KEMAL KIRISCI: You know, there's
very many
conflicting views that are
coming out.
On the one hand, there is what
you have just
said, what Henri has said. But
then the spokesman
of the president, Ibrahim Kalin,
keeps saying
that that's not the position of
the Turkish
government and presidency.
Yet, on the other hand, I have
watched hours
and hours of TV debate, and, in
those debates,
unfortunately, people of high
military ranks,
including a former chief of
staff, is convinced
that there is an American finger
somewhere
along the way, directly or
indirectly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Henri Barkey,
what are the
consequences of that if this
continues in
Turkey?
HENRI BARKEY: Well, the
consequences are serious.
At the moment, the American
government is
trying to keep low and not to
make too much
of a fuss.
But, unfortunately, the longer
this lasts,
the more the Turkish officials
directly or
indirectly attack the United
States, the more
the American -- Turkish public
is going to
become more anti-American.
And we have already seen the
consequences.
Fulbright has canceled now for
next year its
-- its...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Scholar exchange.
HENRI BARKEY: ... scholars going
forward,
because people are afraid that
the Americans
will be at risk.
And, therefore, it's more than
just Americans
being at risk. It's the fact
that it would
be very difficult for Turkish
officials and
American officials, especially
at the military
level, to work together in a
harmonious way
as they did before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Kemal
Kirisci, we're
hearing that officials in the
Erdogan government
are saying this. What about
President Erdogan
himself? Do you think he
believes that the
U.S. was involved?
KEMAL KIRISCI: If you listen to
his rhetoric,
I think you would say yes.
However, it's very difficult to
go into his
mind. He can also be very
pragmatic when he
chooses to be. I think the point
here is that
there was a coup attempt and
there are allegations,
for some, quite convincing
allegations, that
individuals belonging to the
Gulenist movement
were involved in it.
As a consequence, an ally of the
United States,
a member of NATO's military is
in a mess.
The country is in a state of
turmoil. And
from my perspective, I think
these allegations
need to be taken seriously, and
maybe some
cooperation put into place to
investigate
whether they are true or not,
independently
of the extradition issue that
was made reference
to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean --
you're talking
about extraditing the cleric,
the Turkish
cleric who is in Pennsylvania.
KEMAL KIRISCI: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. has said
they don't
have the evidence to proceed
with an extradition.
But just to be clear, what are
you saying
by an investigation? What are
you saying needs
to be done here?
KEMAL KIRISCI: For the average
Turkish mind,
it's very difficult not -- not
to think that
the United States wouldn't have
some access
to intelligence information,
when, for example,,
the commander of the Incirlik
base group,
with whom the United States
shares the base,
was amongst the instigators of
the coup and
even attempted to seek asylum
with U.S. military
authorities there.
So, put yourself in the shoes of
an average
Turkish person, and maybe
officials as well,
and look at the United States,
look at its
resources, look at its
intelligence networks.
It becomes very difficult to
convince them
that somehow the United States
was oblivious
to what was coming up there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me...
(CROSSTALK)
KEMAL KIRISCI: ... prepared
personally to
go along with it, but that's the
state of
mind.
And I'm suggesting that the
United States
has a stake, the government has
a stake to
cooperate with their counterpart
and look
into whatever intelligence and
information
may be available through the
networks that
the U.S. has access.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Henri Barkey, is
there a way
to do that? Where do you see
this going?
HENRI BARKEY: I actually think
the only way
this is going to end is if
there's a very
forceful response from the
United States that
asks President Erdogan needs to
squash these
stories.
The only person in Turkey who
can squash these
stories is Mr. Erdogan. If he
gets up and
says, "I don't believe the
United States was
involved, we have no evidence to
that effect,"
that will put most of the rumors
aside.
But, for that, I think President
Obama has
to get involved. It's not going
to happen
because some State Department
spokesperson
said...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, President
Obama has said
this absolutely, unequivocally
didn't happen,
that there was no U.S.
involvement. So, what
more are you saying President
Obama...
HENRI BARKEY: He said this in a
press interview
with President Nieto of Mexico.
He needs to address directly the
Turkish press,
maybe invite the Turkish press
to the White
House, and challenge also
President Erdogan.
He can't let this go on like
this. There won't
be an investigation. There
cannot be an investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying the
administration
hasn't taken it seriously
enough?
HENRI BARKEY: Right. Right.
So, they have taken it
seriously, but they're
choosing to keep quiet. And that
keeps the
rumors going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Henri Barkey,
Kemal Kirisci,
thanks to both of you.
KEMAL KIRISCI: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: High school students
and parents
sometimes say principals and
teachers don't
quite understand what it's like
to be a student
these days. It turns out there's
an effort
to change that. Some 1,300
principals recently
took a day off from their usual
role and instead
followed one of their students
for a day.
The approach came from two
groups outside
the traditional field of public
education,
the Design School at Stanford
University,
and IDEO, a design company based
in Palo Alto,
California.
Special correspondent John
Tulenko of Education
Week followed one principal
through the first
ever national Shadow a Student
Day Challenge.
It's part of our weekly
education series on
Making the Grade.
KAREN RITTER, Assistant
Principal, East Leyden
High School: My name is Karen
Ritter. I'm
an assistant principal at East
Leyden High
School, which is just outside of
Chicago.
And, today, I will be shadowing
a student.
JOHN TULENKO: Why are you doing
this?
KAREN RITTER: Just to get a
sense of what
students go through during the
day.
I don't really get to spend a
lot of time
with students. Usually, I'm in
charge of things
that the teachers are involved
in. So, this
includes teacher evaluations,
teacher attendance,
professional development. I
would say 50 percent
is in meetings.
JOHN TULENKO: Do you feel like
you know what
goes on here?
KAREN RITTER: I -- I do, just
because I do
observe a lot of classrooms.
Now, I'm looking
at it more from the teacher's
perspective.
But now I want to know what it
feels like
through the lens of a student.
JOHN TULENKO: Her public high
school serves
some 1,700 students and is both
racially and
economically diverse.
Today, Karen is following a
ninth-grader.
KAREN RITTER: Wait for me, Alan.
JOHN TULENKO: Alan Garcia.
KAREN RITTER: I first met him
because he came
to my office and said he wanted
to talk about
his schedule for next year. He's
in a lot
of remedial classes, and he
wanted to be changed
out of those classes. So, I
really want to
know what makes him feel that
way.
JOHN TULENKO: She hopes to find
out, not just
observing Alan's classes, but by
fully participating
in his entire day, which started
at 7:35,
with a boost of physical
education.
KAREN RITTER: This is the class
I was most
nervous about, because I don't
run.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN TULENKO: Her stamina would
be put to
the test by what comes next,
seven more 50-minute
periods, starting with learning
center for
one-on-one help, followed by
Alan's usual
two-hour double math class, then
barely pausing
for a bite, before jumping into
the second
half of the day, four
back-to-back classes,
literacy, computers, English and
freshman
seminar, until the 3:00 p.m.
dismissal bell
marks the finish line.
What is it like having Ms.
Ritter follow you
around?
ALAN GARCIA, East Leyden High
School Student:
Having the assistant principal
follow you
everywhere, it's -- it feels
weird.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN TULENKO: And for Karen? We
checked in
with her about halfway through
the day.
KAREN RITTER: I'm holding up.
(LAUGHTER)
KAREN RITTER: I definitely feel
like my energy
level has gone down since this
morning. I
had to write an essay in
literacy, and I felt
like I had a hard time
concentrating and trying
to focus. Yes, it's a lot of
sitting and a
lot of thinking.
So, like algebra, algebra block,
so it's a
double period. That was hard,
because, especially,
it's over a couple different
lunch periods.
So, every time the bell rang, I
wanted to
get up and leave. But it's like,
oh, no, we
have another period to go. More
time to go.
JOHN TULENKO: Double period math
is one of
the remedial classes Alan wants
to change.
ALAN GARCIA: It's really boring.
And it gets
me exhausted at times, just
sitting down for
two hours. It gets me mad and
sometimes puts
me down, because I'm like, I
could be like
learning new stuff. Instead, I'm
stuck with
something I have been doing for
like seven,
sixth, eighth grade.
JOHN TULENKO: So, what do you
want to be doing?
ALAN GARCIA: I would like to be
taking, French,
like, woods, metals, all those
types of classes.
KAREN RITTER: Because Alan is in
the classes
that he is, he doesn't have the
opportunity
for a lot of those electives. He
was placed
in certain classes because of
his test scores,
but I don't know if he
necessarily needs to
be in that level.
He was getting things and
teaching them to
me.
WOMAN: Yes, you got it.
KAREN RITTER: Alan helped me.
WOMAN: Really?
KAREN RITTER: Yes.
I think Alan represents someone
who is very
representative of our school,
middle-of-the-road
kid who, when challenged, can
reach high,
very high expectations. And I
think maybe
keeping him at a certain level
might hinder
his opportunity to do that. So,
I would like
to see more opportunities given
to students.
And maybe we need to rethink the
way that
we place students, not based on
test scores.
JOHN TULENKO: How else had her
views changed?
To find out, we asked Karen to
grade East
Leyden High School on some key
measures, both
before and after her shadow day.
Keep in mind,
her view was limited to just
Alan's classes.
We began with this statement:
In this school, students learn
actively, creating,
questioning, discovering. Your
grade yesterday
was a B. Today?
KAREN RITTER: I would say a
C-minus.
JOHN TULENKO: Her scores also
went down for
student engagement, from B to
C-plus.
And relevance, how often
teachers drew a clear
connection between students'
work and the
outside world, that dropped from
C to D.
KAREN RITTER: So, we're looking
for creativity.
JOHN TULENKO: But her take on
school climate
and the expectations, both
remained high.
KAREN RITTER: Yes, we have some
work to do.
We have some things that we can
fix. But it's
a great place. I think we
provide a safe environment
for kids. We have plenty of
resources for
them.
I think I will do some more
shadow experiences
with an ELL student, with a
special-ed student,
with an AP-level student,
because I think
they do have different
experiences here.
That was fun. Do we have to do
it again?
The point is to know what the
students are
thinking and wanting, and start
with them.
JOHN TULENKO: In Franklin Park,
Illinois,
I'm John Tulenko of Education
Week, reporting
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a story of
scientific history,
human drama, and ethical
controversies shaped
around the idea of memory.
You can find Jeffrey Brown at
our "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: In recent
decades, scientists
have made great advances in
understanding
how and where the human brain
makes and stores
memories, a key part of forming
our identities.
A man who unwittingly helped
them do it, Henry
Molaison, who underwent a
lobotomy in 1953
intended to relieve his
epileptic seizures.
A large part of his hippocampus
was removed.
LUKE DITTRICH, Author, "Patient
H.M.: A Story
of Memory, Madness, and Family
Secrets": As
soon as he came out of the
operating room,
it became clear that he was no
longer able
to create new memories.
And so this gave scientists for
the first
time really a clear sense of how
important
these structures were to the
creation of new
memories. And that was sort of
the first and
in many ways most fundamental
thing that he
taught us about how memory
works.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his new book,
Luke Dittrich
tells the story of the man known
for decades
as Patient H.M., considered the
most important
research subject in the history
of brain science.
And there's more. The lobotomy
was performed
by Dittrich's grandfather, Dr.
William Scoville,
a prominent brain surgeon at a
time when such
procedures were done by the
thousands. I spoke
to Luke Dittrich at Washington's
Lincoln Theatre.
LUKE DITTRICH: I personally
found it to be
a very shocking story during the
course of
my reporting.
This came to be during an era
when the lines
between medical practice and
medical research
were fairly blurry, and, you
know, people
crossed some lines that they
most likely shouldn't
have crossed.
JEFFREY BROWN: And this is the
era of lobotomies.
LUKE DITTRICH: That's correct.
And one of the things that my
research led
me deep into was the history of
the lobotomy
and of this whole field known as
psychosurgeries
that came out of desperate
times, the mentally
ill at the time, in the sort of
1930s and
1940s. There were no -- there
were no real
good, effective treatments for a
lot of the
things that they suffered from,
and the lobotomy
rose up as a sort of -- a quick
fix.
But it had serious consequences.
JEFFREY BROWN: We live in an age
now of neuroscience.
Right?
It's sort of everywhere.
LUKE DITTRICH: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: With a lot of new
technology.
But this is a period not so long
ago, in the
20th century, where very little
was known
about the brain.
LUKE DITTRICH: Two millennia
ago, doctors
really thought nothing of
performing vivisections
on live prisoners in order to
understand anatomy.
Thankfully, our standards of
medical ethics
have evolved quite a bit. But I
do think that
readers will be shocked to see
kind of how
bad things were back in the
middle of the
20th century.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a very
personal story
for you, because the doctor who
performed
the surgery on Patient H.M. was
your grandfather.
LUKE DITTRICH: My grandfather
was a neurosurgeon.
He was, by all accounts, a
brilliant neurosurgeon
and a renowned one. He was -- he
founded and
was the director for many years
of the Department
of Neurosurgery at Hartford
Hospital. He was
a Yale professor. He did a lot
of good.
I mean, he saved a lot of lives.
He also was
one of the world's most sort of
zealous proponents
of psychosurgery and one of the
world's most
prolific lobotomists. And his
sort of driving
passion for the lobotomy and for
psychosurgery
grew in large part out of the
fact that his
own wife, my grandmother, was
mentally ill.
She was institutionalized in one
of the same
asylums that he practiced in.
And he was,
you know, on a kind of -- on a
crusade, on
a sort of -- on a quest to
develop a cure
for his own wife's madness.
One of the things that struck me
in sort of
looking at the history of
psychosurgery is
how often, you know, how often
the lobotomized
individuals were women. There
are a number
of possible answers for why that
may be so,
but I think perhaps the most
compelling one
is that a lot of the symptoms of
the lobotomy,
the passivity, tractability,
these were symptoms
that at the time were viewed as
kind of, you
know, ideal elements, according
to men, of
feminine traits, and that, in
some senses,
a lobotomized woman could be
viewed as almost
an ideal wife, which was one of
the sort of
horrifying things that I was
kind of grappling
with as I was looking at this
story.
JEFFREY BROWN: And Henry
himself, how much
was he aware of his own role in
scientific
history?
LUKE DITTRICH: He certainly
didn't have a
clear awareness of his own role.
He would be told many times that
he was famous
in a certain sense. As the
studies on him
went on, you know, certain
things would stick.
And so he may have by the end of
his life
had this, you know, vague sense
of his importance,
but he certainly didn't have any
sort of clear
sense like we do of how deeply
and fundamentally
important he was.
JEFFREY BROWN: Part of this
story goes on,
right, past Henry's life,
because you raise
some questions at the end about
the extent
of how much he was sort of
controlled, how
much research on him was
controlled, how much
we really know the story in the
end.
LUKE DITTRICH: Some of the more
fascinating
chapters in Henry's history
really happened
quite a few years after his
death, just recently.
The story, in some sense, is
still unfolding.
The ethical questions
surrounding Henry's
story to me begin in that
operating room where
my grandfather made that
decision to operate.
And I think that was a decision
that deserves
close scrutiny.
Afterwards, there are a number
of other questions
that, you know, follow
throughout the six
decades of experimentation that
was done on
him, and, you know, even after
his death,
what was done...
JEFFREY BROWN: Including who
owned his brain.
LUKE DITTRICH: Who owned his
brain, exactly.
A custody war basically broke
out over the
possession of Henry's brain.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, well,
we will continue
that part of the story online.
And I will invite our watchers
to go there
later on.
For now, the book is "Patient
H.M."
Luke Dittrich, thank you so
much.
LUKE DITTRICH: Thank you so much
for having
me.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight's "NewsHour"
Shares come
from Roger Baker, an artist
whose paintbrush
is often a lawn mower.
His latest work, a giant
portrait of Beethoven
ROGER BAKER, Artist: My name is
Roger Baker.
I'm an artist, a commercial
artist.
So the field piece is an
expression of my
own personal interests. I start
with something
that I'm passionate and
interested in, so
it's real. I'm not cutting for
everybody else.
I'm cutting myself.
And so the first one I did in
2000, we cut
the Statue of Liberty. And after
the Statue
of Liberty, we did Elvis. And
then we did
Einstein with the Museum of
Natural History
in New York. And then I cut
Hendrix and then
Indian Larry.
I cut a piece in Orange County,
New York.
It was for the 75th anniversary
of the Purple
Heart. And this last piece I
did, which was
Beethoven, it was about a
million square feet.
It has shagbark hickory trees,
which are loaded
with squirrels. And they have
kind of landed
on Beethoven's lapel.
I pick a field that's going to
be conducive
to the piece. It has to be a
healthy field,
a hayfield. I do a scale drawing
in my studio.
I might do four or five
different drawings.
And then we come in and lay out
our image,
and then we cut with smaller
mowers, like
zero turns and just push mowers.
Once that's established, we can
come in and
cut the gradations and get the
different levels
of grass to reflect light
differently. So,
when you are over top of the
field from 2,000
feet, looking straight down on
it, the areas
that are cut real low will be
lighter. The
areas that are left tall will be
darker. And
we have gradations in between
those.
On the ground, when you look at
it, you can't
tell really anything. It just --
it's so huge.
It just looks like a bad mowing
job. But when
you get up high, it gets very
representational
and becomes an image of
Beethoven.
You're mowing a lawn. And that's
all I'm doing.
I'm mowing a lawn. And it
brought people together.
I think that's really, really
great and it's
very satisfying to see as an
artist to have
a piece of artwork that you do
from the soul
and the heart go out there, and
it brings
people together. And I think
that's really
special. That's really special
to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A different kind
of talent.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: A new
law in Massachusetts will make
it illegal
for job interviewers to ask
about a potential
hire's salary. On Making Sense,
our job-hunting
expert argues why he thinks you
should never
disclose what you earn when
you're looking
for a new job. All that and more
is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, part two of our
autism series,
a profile of a young adult
facing the challenges
of independence.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.